Human beings are innovative creatures that have engineered many machines for technological advancement and manipulation of the environment, be it for better or for worse. That being said, are humans actually at the helm of Spaceship Earth, or are we only capable of living in the presence of a microbial world? We have utilized microbes to our advantage in innumerable processes, ranging from legume cropping in agriculture to fermentation in alcohol production, as well as denitrification in sewage treatment. As a matter of fact, humans have been relying on microbes prior to our acknowledgement of their existence. Microbes have been present on Mother Earth long before the existence of Homo sapiens and have established the distinctive, phenotypic features of Earth’s atmosphere suitable for human life. In addition, microbes are an essential part of Earth’s biogeochemical cycles, which are required to sustain the lives of the many other organisms which benefit the human species. Thus, humans live in a microbial world and would not be able to survive otherwise without the metabolic processes provided by microbes. Microbes, on the other hand, would easily thrive in a human-less world.

Microbes have existed long before the birth of the human race and can easily continue to thrive even in the absence of human intervention. To begin with, it is important to discuss the history of microbial life in order to understand and appreciate the influence these microorganisms have on Earth and her environment. According to geological evidence, microbial activity has present on Earth for at least 3.5 billion years (Gyr) (5). Evidence derived from stable-isotope fractionation of 3.5-Gyr stromatolites suggested possible sulfate reduction methanogenesis activity (2). In addition, molecular fossils from late-Archaean rocks (i.e. 3.0 – 2.5 Gyr ago) provided evidence of preserved biomarkers, such as 2a-methylhopanes from cyanobacteria, allowing for further inference of the types of microbes and metabolic processes present during that period (5). Furthermore, microbes can influence their surrounding environment through the production of metabolic products and byproducts required for survival. An example would be the nitrogen cycle, where multiple species of microbes interact together, forming a nutrient cycle. These interdependent relationships where a species of microbes utilize the waste of another species as substrate to generate energy for growth and reproduction have existed long before human intervention, and would continue to exist due the self-sustainability of the symbiosis that exists between these microbial colonies (2). Despite many volcanic eruptions, meteorite impacts and extinction events during Earth’s early years, many diverse microbes persisted and continue to flourish today. In addition to being diverse and possessing remarkable adaptability, microbes have the ability to perform horizontal gene transfer (HGT) of genes to other organisms in order to preserve essential metabolic pathways (2). If the extinction, per se, of the original taxonomic unit were to occur, the dispersion of essential core genes by HGT ensures the conservation of core metabolic pathways due to the selective pressure of the environment. In other words, non-essential and irrelevant genes are lost, while those that are important are preserved. Microbes have a long history on Earth and have played an important role in shaping the planet in which we currently inhabit.

The human race as a whole is dependent on microbial activity for survival on Earth. Firstly, microbes have established the current phenotypic atmosphere of Earth, allowing human existence. The atmosphere of the early Earth was anoxic and had a completely different composition than the atmosphere we have today (4). Abiotic and biotic factors such as volcanic eruptions and methane-producing microbes contributed to and atmosphere rich in carbon dioxide and methane (2). However, 2.3 Gyr ago, there was an initial rise in oxygen largely due to oxygenic photosynthesis performed by cyanobacteria (4). Although the rise in oxygen concentration led to a mass extinction known as the Great Oxygenation Event, the oxic atmosphere allowed the evolution of many aerobic organisms and brought about the species which would eventually be known as Homo sapiens (3). In addition to establishing an atmosphere suitable for humans, microbes were capable of taking advantage of the abiotic geochemical reactions produced by Earth and have co-evolved to form biogeochemical cycles (2). These biogeochemical cycles are essential for the production of major elements required for building biological macromolecules such as proteins, lipids and nucleic acids and thus, are crucial for sustaining human life (2).

Biogeochemical cycles are largely dependent on reduction-oxidation (redox) reactions mediated by microbes. These important cycles create fluxes of major essential elements such as hydrogen (H), carbon (C), nitrogen (N), oxygen (O) and sulfur (S) that are required for the synthesis of all biological macromolecules and ultimately, human survival (2). An example of a major biogeochemical cycle is the nitrogen cycle. The N cycle is formed by microbes and is essential for providing living organisms access to nitrogen, needed for the synthesis nucleic acid and proteins (1). Although approximately 78% of Earth’s atmosphere is composed of molecular nitrogen (N2), atmospheric nitrogen is inert and not readily available for human use (5). Nitrogen fixation is the only biological process currently available which allows the conversion of N2 to ammonium (NH4+), providing accessible nitrogen to humans, animals and non-nitrogen fixing plants altogether (2). Certain microbes, such as cyanobacteria, express nitrogenases and can catalyze the irreversible reaction to fix nitrogen (5). Following nitrogen fixation, nitrification and denitrification by certain microbes occur to convert the available nitrogen back into N2 to maintain the metabolic cycle and a balance between atmospheric nitrogen and available nitrogen (2). With the rapid growth of the human population, food becomes scarce and methods for increasing provisions are needed. Taking advantage of the endosymbiotic nitrogen-fixing microbes found in legumes, humans have developed sustainable approaches for agriculture, such as legume cropping in lieu of synthetic fertilizers, in order to provide accessible nitrogen to crops (1). Thus, microbes have played and continue to play an integral role in the storybook of human survival.

In conclusion, microbes have played a vital part in providing the appropriate environment required for human existence and continue to play an integral part for human life on Earth. Not only have microbes lived long before the appearance of Homo sapiens, microbes have evolved and adapted to the harsh geological environment—be it by natural causes or by human influence—and have changed the phenotype of Earth’s atmosphere to establish a habitable place for humans today. Lastly, microbial metabolic pathways are necessary to maintain biogeochemical cycles. This allows microbes to catalyze thermodynamically constrained redox reactions of the cycles, allowing their own survival and that of other living organisms.








References:
1. Canfield, DE, Glazer, AN, Falkowski, PG. 2010. The Evolution and Future of Earth’s Nitrogen Cycle. Science. 330:192-196. doi: 10.1126/science.1186120.
2. Falkowski, PG, Fenchel, T, Delong, EF. 2008. The Microbial Engines That Drive Earth’s Biogeochemical Cycles. Science. 320:1034-1039. doi: 10.1126/science.1153213.
3. Fischer, WW, Hemp, J, Valentine, JS. 2016. How did life survive Earth’s great oxygenation? Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 31:166-178. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2016.03.013.
4. Kasting, J, Siefert, J. 2003. Life and the evolution of Earth’s atmosphere (vol 296, pg 1066, 2002). Science. 299:1015-1015.
5. Sleep, NH, Nisbet, EG. 2001. The habitat and nature of early life. Nature. 409:1083-1091. doi: 10.1038/35059210.
